So the three things I wanted
to cover with you today.
The first of all is WebObjects and Apple,
where WebObjects fits
into the Apple family.
Secondly, where WebObjects is today,
or I should say yesterday,
and where we're going today
and tomorrow moving forward.
So as Steve mentioned
at Macworld in New York,
Apple has always been known for being
the world's best personal computers,
for having a really great
killer desktop platform.
But in today's age of the internet,
we really want to be
thinking outside of the box.
And so why a lot of what we do,
particularly with Mac OS X,
is focused around the desktop,
there's a lot of things we do that
are focused on the internet platform,
things like the QuickTime,
like streaming, like HTML web design,
and so forth, Mac OS X Server and other
products in that family.
And what we've done is
really taken WebObjects and
made it our internet engine.
We think WebObjects is the best
tool for developing and deploying
applications on the internet.
It's a powerful engine to
interactively deliver internet content,
whether it's HTML, PDF, movies, Java,
anything you vend over the
internet can be supercharged by
having Web Objects underneath it.
Another way of looking at that,
it's a smart way to bring your
applications to the internet.
How many of you have done any
sort of client server development?
Okay, for a handful of you,
a lot of you probably have,
how many of you currently
have applications that
never talk to anything else?
Everybody has to talk to something,
whether it's a local data store,
whether it's other applications,
whether it's web servers,
whether it's to get updates,
whether it's to get new content,
whether it's to send customer
registration information back and forth.
WebObjects is now an incredibly
powerful way to build this
relationship with your customer to your
application to you over the internet.
internet.
And this is also what Apple has
done with WebObjects ourselves.
It is our internet engine.
It is the system that powers
our internet strategy,
whether it's the Apple Store, Apple.com,
iTools, iCards,
the Developer Connection website.
All these things are
powered using WebObjects.
And we've known it's a great tool.
The top 3,000 customers in the largest
websites in the world know that this is
a great and powerful and awesome tool.
But we want to make sure that you
all can take advantage of it as well.
For those of you who aren't very familiar
with WebObjects and the technology,
let me just give you a real
quick summary of how it works.
A traditional web server
just takes static HTML pages
and bends them to a client.
But often you have other data
sources you want to use to bring
to your customers rather than them
to hardwire everything into HTML.
Mainframes, databases, ERP systems,
directory services, etc.
What WebObjects does is
take all the information,
feeds it into an application server
that manages and massages the object,
and uses that to dynamically
generate HTML pages,
or equivalently Java,
which can then be vended to any client.
Because it's a fully scalable,
what's called a three-tier system,
you can easily add new application
servers into the mix and dynamically
create a very highly scalable,
robust,
fault-tolerant web application service.
WebObjects has been the
industry-leading application server.
It allows scalable deployment
on a number of platforms,
has a very powerful,
rich set of graphical development tools,
which not only allow code-free
development like you saw this morning,
but also very powerful in-depth
customization because of a
very rich public API building
on top of extremely powerful,
well-tested objects.
And these allow you to connect to
basically any kind of structured data,
whether it's a database,
directory service,
materials management system, et cetera.
And the benefits of this are threefold.
First of all, you get incredible
productivity with WebObjects,
up to ten times faster than traditional
alternative development tools.
We have a fully integrated
suite of development tools,
so we're planning on supercharging
even more going forward.
We've really learned a lot
of lessons in the last,
you know, this code base is built
on the old Next Step,
Open Step, DBKit technology.
It's been around since the early '90s,
longer than any other tool in this class.
And our team has really
learned a lot of lessons,
as we've done various
generations of this project,
to make sure we have a very powerful
object-oriented architecture,
something that's very
difficult to build properly,
but we've got more experience than
probably anybody else in the world.
Secondly, it has very powerful
integration services.
You can store your data pretty much
anywhere and access it in a single
application on a single client,
talking to a multitude of different data
services of all sorts of different types.
And it's a very high-performance solution
used to run things like the Apple Store,
multi-threaded,
multiple instances on a single system.
Also, it can be transferred from
a Mac OS X service system
all the way up to high-end,
multi-CPU, Solaris and HP boxes.
So, just to give you a quick summary
of where we are with the currently
shipping versions of WebObjects,
we really feel like we've
had the best technology,
the coolest solutions,
and a totally awesome business.
The technology that we released
this March was WebObjects 4.5,
which we believe is smarter, easier,
and even more interoperable than
previous generations of WebObjects.
The system's a lot smarter in its ability
to analyze and report performance issues,
to manage reconnects and
failures to your database.
It's easier than ever to
develop solutions using the
new direct-to-Java client,
as well as a redesigned
WebObjects builder for creating
dynamic HTML components,
and even more interoperable
by including great support for
parsing and integrating XML data,
as well as connecting with
directory services such as LDAP.
WebObjects has continued a
huge streak of winning awards,
most recently a CODI from
the Software and
Information Industry Association for
Best Application Development Tool,
Best Application Software,
and a great application server
from Java's Developer Journal.
This is the 1999
Java Developer's Journal.
Our developers haven't been quite as
aggressive this year with the voting.
Feel free to join in if you agree
with me that this is a very cool
tool that deserves to be recognized.
And then we also won the
Software Product of the Year from
Network Computing for being
very well connected and also
being a great application server.
So we've got a huge list of awards.
They're all on the website.
It gets almost tedious
to recite them all.
But a lot of people have learned
that this is a great tool.
And one of the reasons it's so
great is because it's a great tool
for the development of software.
And one of the reasons it's
so great is because we really
believe in industry standards.
We've deployed a host
of different systems.
We support a multitude
of different languages.
We integrate with a whole slew of
different development technologies,
whether it's scripting languages
or C++ or data formats such as XML.
And we have data adapters
to most SQL databases,
LDAP, CORBA, DCOM,
with a variety of third
parties that provide a wealth
of connectivity solutions.
And the customers today read
like a top 100 list of the web.
You've heard all the names: BBC,
Consumers Digest, Disney, AAA, Logistics,
US Web, Adobe, the US Postal Service.
These are all just very highly
demanding companies that really
need a very powerful solution
with very rapid time to market.
And they found WebObjects the
perfect solution for their needs.
In order to reach--and we have
a couple of quotes here from
people who've really leveraged
the dynamic HTML creation process,
integration with CORBA and
Java-compatible architectures.
architectures,
and the list goes on and on and on.
We have a number of incredibly
talented partners that really make
the WebObjects technology come alive
and map to your business solutions,
whether that's for HTML design tools,
databases, reporting tools,
integration with PDF and
other technologies.
We have hundreds of developers who
have been working very closely with
us for years to rebuild robust,
flexible solutions,
customized to different vertical markets.
This has really paid off.
We have been first to market in
the web application server space.
We essentially created it several years
ago with the first version of WebObjects.
The last time they've run the numbers,
we were number one in market share.
We have a phenomenal gross
margin and double-digit growth.
We've just been really
pleased with the business,
and it's really due to an awesome team.
WebObjects has had a dedicated
sales force focused exclusively
around these types of high-end
enterprise class solutions.
We have a whole army of trained
consultants who are extremely
knowledgeable and passionate
about these solutions.
A very sophisticated training program,
which you'll see on your demo CD,
some of the fruits of that,
as well as a worldwide network of
resellers and a very talented and
focused engineering group that,
as we say, has been doing object-oriented
development for hundreds of man years.
But to just give you a taste of where
we are just today with WebObjects,
I've asked Andreas Venkar from the
rapid deployment team of WebObjects
to give a walk-through of the
demo that you saw this morning.
Was everyone here at the keynote today?
Yeah.
You like it?
Okay.
I'll try and go through it
a little bit more slowly,
so you can get a better idea of what
it was that we did during the keynote.
Why don't you start with the
direct HTML connection there.
This is a traditional WebObjects
application that WebObjects
3.5 or WebObjects 4.0 developer
would be comfortable with.
WebObjects 4.0,
we introduced a new technology
called direct to web,
which basically allows you to
very quickly step through a
database and just say these are
the various fields I care about.
Give me a user interface
that's built on that.
You get a very nice, simple, clean,
elegant looking HTML based user
interface with a different pop-up.
You can pop up buttons and search fields.
You can search on a field, do a query,
pull back a detail, etc.
It's very nice and simple and very
quick and easy to get up and running,
but it's a very limited interface.
It looks like you're running
on something that's a notch or
two above a TN3270 terminal,
but doesn't really have the
look and feel of a modern,
rich operating system.
It doesn't really leverage all the
power you have sitting with a G3
or G4 processor on your desktop.
We looked at this and we said, "Well,
this is kind of nice." But this is WWDC.
This is Steve Jobs we're talking about.
We can't have him showing this.
We need something really sexier.
So they said, "Well, okay,
give me a few minutes.
Let me see what I can
throw together." And so,
"Okay, Andreas, you have a few minutes.
Let's see what you can throw together."
So this is the new project builder
that's available as part of DP4.
We've custom hacked it
to support WebObjects.
The version you have on DP4 today
does not yet support WebObjects.
It will very soon.
But we just pick an assistant there,
in this case the direct to Java client,
which is a new technology.
It was introduced in
WebObjects 4.5 in March.
We just give it a name.
So it's a database model.
And this is really the hardest
job if you're managing a database
application is understanding your model.
What are your relationships?
What are the important schema?
But once you create that model
using the knowledge of the database,
WebObjects makes it really easy
to take that information and turn
it into a dynamic application.
It uses very sophisticated heuristics
to determine what are the primary
tables in that database which
need to be rendered differently.
And you just go ahead and build it.
And basically it creates a very
simple shell server application
which then talks to a very
simple shell client application.
So you saw the code.
There's basically three or four lines
of code and mostly they just say,
"Hi, I'm running now." All the work is
taken care of by the frameworks that
are already built into WebObjects.
So you can start here and just
build this application very quickly.
And then you launch a
generic Java client.
This is something they can download
from the web or you can have one
client pre-installed on a machine.
So what you basically have to do is add
a URL telling which server it talks to.
It connects to the server.
The server knows, "Okay,
this client I can tell this
information to." It generates
the XML describing the data.
That client dynamically renders
that into a user interface,
adjusts the sizes and widths of things
so they fit reasonably on a page.
And as you see, they're all alphabetized.
This isn't a hand-tuned thing.
This is just how it comes out straight
from the directory Java client.
Very powerful technology leveraging
the power of Java and Aqua on Mac OS X.
You can do a search.
You can bring up a detail view.
And we also do a little bit of work
to integrate a QuickTime movie view
into the directory Java application.
It's something that you can do using the
QuickTime for Java clients available.
And... There are things I can do.
So you see here Queen Amadella
meditating in deep thought about
the destruction of her world.
And that's the web--and there it is,
in five minutes,
a complete direct-to-web job application.
Thank you, Andreas.
And like they say,
you don't have to take my word for it.
You can go home with the WebObjects
4.5 technology that we've given to
you in the developer's backpack,
run on Mac OS X server or Windows NT,
and be able to immediately get up and
running with WebObjects and build an
application just like that yourself.
I don't think that the Java in
Mac OS X is quite up to
snuff with what we have here,
but you probably even get a basic
Java application running today on
top of Mac OS X DP4 and get a little
feel for what that looks like.
So this is really, really cool, awesome,
and powerful technology,
but we wanted to go so much
further than we have in the past.
And so we really set
ourselves three goals.
And the biggest area is really trying
to make this a lower barrier to entry.
A lot of people who really love
WebObjects see it as incredibly cool,
but you work in the
$1,000 application space,
or you do a one-person small
consulting shop for small businesses
that can't afford a $50,000 server.
How can you take advantage of this power
to deliver really cool applications
or websites for your customers?
So we're focusing on making
the technology more accessible,
expanding the array of
solutions available,
and creating a whole new
business model for driving this
really into the mainstream.
So to start talking
about the new technology,
I've asked Tony Trujillo-Villan,
the director of WebObjects Engineering,
to share a few words about the
upcoming version of WebObjects.
Want me to run this?
Thanks, Ernie.
So as you heard earlier in the keynote,
Steve mentioned we have a new
release coming out later this year,
and we are calling it WebObjects
5 for Java for a good reason.
We're going to be translating our
frameworks into 100% pure Java.
We believe this will help you guys
and make the product more usable by
Java developers at a first glance.
You can deploy it anywhere.
And I'd like to announce
that we're now going to be
qualifying the product on Linux.
We're also going to be including
a JDBC for Universal Database
Connectivity and some inoperability
standards for the internet.
Sorry.
We'll be talking more about
Enterprise Java Beans and
XML later on in the week,
so please make sure you
join us at those sessions.
So as you heard and as you saw
earlier today that we're going
to be optimizing for Mac OS X,
Ernie mentioned that the CD that you
have in your backpacks doesn't work on X,
but the product that
we're working on now,
when released, it will work on X.
And you'll see the Aqua user
interface in that release.
We'll also be using the new project
builder that you saw in the demo.
And we have a couple more exciting
opportunities in the future.
We'll be working with AppleScript and
network info directory services.
So with that, I'd like to invite Francois
Joop to give a demo.
Hi, everyone.
Hi everyone,
my name is Francois Jouaux and I'm
going to present you this WebObjects for
Java version that we call WebObjects 5.0.
Okay, so, well,
guess what OS we are running here.
Any guess?
No, not NT.
We have a Linux box here.
We have a Mac OS X server box here,
which is actually being displayed.
And we are going to take one example
out of the box from WebObjects
5.0 and run it on both machines.
So, run.
Here, my charming assistant, run.
Upload.
We'll try the create plot example.
So, as you see,
We can run WebObjects
Java out of Project Builder.
So WebObjects Java is
compatible with WebObjects 4.5.
It lives side by side with it,
and the same Project Builder is used.
So Ron will compile the application,
which is a 4.5 example that
we have translated to Java.
"The application is running now on my
QuestN server and I'm going to access
it through the browser which is here."
Okay, so this is actually an interesting
example because it has a small
graphic engine underneath that
enables it to draw some graphs.
For example, here we have a pie chart.
I can type whatever I want.
[Transcript missing]
So, as you know, Java,
you build once and you run anywhere.
Well, it is true as well for
WebObjects or Java,
and this is the reason
why we're moving there.
So Ron is our Linux guru,
and he knows pretty well
the tar command too.
Okay, so could you please switch
to machine number two?
So you see this is Linux running X.
And we are doing the FTP.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so the package has been
tarred up and moved.
Okay, here in red, demo.tar.
Both of these OS have Unix as a base,
so the same command can
be used to enter it.
So here's something very interesting.
We do not support yet Linux in
our pre-alpha release,
so we have to fake our licensing so
that the Java VM believes it's Solaris
so that our licensing key can work.
So now the licensing check
passed and the app is ready.
We can show you.
Okay,
so the app is running now on Linux and
it's actually the exact same application.
There is not much more I can say,
except I can go back
to the statistics page.
Oops, we have an exception.
That's okay, actually.
I wanted to show you the exception.
So you see here we have the
backtrace of the exception is
actually rendered in the browser.
And if we switch back to
the machine number three,
please.
[Transcript missing]
Ron is a quality engineer with us,
so it's a challenge for him
to introduce a bug in an app.
He's used to finding them.
I'm good at introducing bugs.
So he's now typing
A very ugly bug, actually.
A null pointer exception,
and he will run the application again.
So I'm going to click on the right link.
Hopefully you'll see another
case of this exception.
Okay, so the same app come up,
but if run did well,
when I click on Update Graph,
I'm going to get an exception.
Well, here it is.
Now, you see that you get a backtrace
with the first line being in your
code and a clickable link here.
If I click on the link,
watch what happens here.
You get straight to the
line in Project Builder
where the exception occurs.
So, not only is bad in moving to Java,
and that's a great example of a
better development environment.
Thank you.
Hey, can I ask you a favor?
Can you bring the Linux-- actually,
put back the-- with the Mac OS X on that
screen and the Linux on that screen?
Can you do that?
Or bring the Linux on the other screen?
Number two?
Mac OS X's idea of Unix,
the rest of the world's idea of Unix.
Gotta love it.
Thanks,
you can go back to the slides now.
So we have this incredibly
powerful technology,
which is really getting
out in the mainstream.
But it's still incredibly sophisticated.
And one of the things that people
have often accused Apple of is
creating simplistic toy machines,
things that look cute or look pretty,
but are underpowered,
don't really scale to really
great complicated solutions.
And with Mac OS X and WebObjects,
I think we're really bringing a whole
different world to answer that problem.
As you can see, we do have all the power
of Unix underneath.
We have a heck of a lot
more than that on top,
which is really accessible for the
ordinary user to accept and enjoy as
if it was just a traditional Macintosh.
Just as you see with WebObjects,
you have incredibly powerful
and simple to use tools that a
relatively unsophisticated developer
can get up to speed on very quickly.
But there's still a lot of depth in all
the Unix and all the interaction of the
sophisticated tools going on in the back.
So one of the things we needed
to do is figure out how do we
make sure that our customers,
our partners,
can really tap all the power that exists
within the WebObjects and Mac OS X.
And because of that,
we introduced a whole new
initiative called Apple iServices.
And I'm pleased to
announce Scott Anderson,
the new director of Apple iServices,
here to tell you more about it.
Please welcome Scott.
Thanks Ernie.
I can't tell you how excited I am to
see four or five hundred people in one
room here to talk about WebObjects.
This is truly a great day for our
product and I'm incredibly proud
of what the company's been able
to do and the decisions we've been
able to make around the technology.
Just to put this in context,
I've been with Apple for three years.
Been prior to Apple with
Next for almost seven years.
So this to me is a culmination
of a lot of events.
And to come out of the gates with a
pricing strategy that's as aggressive
as it is and a business strategy
for my organization that I think
is compelling is really exciting.
So before I start,
I didn't see the show of
hands earlier in the session.
How many people are currently
using WebObjects in the audience?
Great.
And how many people here are familiar
with Apple Enterprise Software?
[Transcript missing]
becomes Apple iServices.
Okay?
Apple iServices,
if we go back in history,
what did AES do?
AES sold WebObjects and delivered
services to the business
and enterprise marketplace.
Today, effective May 15th,
Apple iServices is dedicated
to delivering custom solutions
through our consulting,
integration, training,
and support services.
[Transcript missing]
I want to talk a little
bit about our partners.
Today we really have three types of
partners within the old construct of AES.
We have the Enterprise Alliance Program,
we have Solution Providers,
and we have Systems Integrators.
The EAP program,
which many of you may be members of,
is really a developer program
focused around WebObjects,
providing support services and
training as well as product.
That program will be transitioned
over into Apple's worldwide developer
relations programs and we'll be
communicating with our EAP members
over the next 30 to 45 days as to
what that transition looks like.
We've also got a suite
of solution providers,
folks who take WebObjects and
build vertical market solutions
around the technology and take
that technology to market.
And we have Systems Integrators,
folks who are in the business
of delivering custom solutions,
who build domain expertise in the product
and go out and help solve problems.
And I'm hoping, frankly,
that amongst this group of developers
in the audience today and participants
in the conference in general,
there will be a tremendous increase in
Apple developers who embrace the product
and build solutions using WebObjects.
So I'm hoping you'll all be part
of the program moving forward.
I think there's tremendous opportunity.
We're looking at the possibility
of extending our business model
to include components and reusable
frameworks as part of our services play.
We're also looking at programs to
encourage vertical market applications.
We have app vendors today who
deliver solutions into everything
from litigation support to logistics
to e-commerce applications.
And by decreasing the barrier
of entry and eliminating the
price point on deployment,
I'm really hoping that there will
be a tremendous amount of increased
participation in the program.
And lastly, I really hope that with our
support as Apple iServices,
product marketing,
as well as worldwide developer relations,
we can collectively work with the
app vendors to create solutions that
are more accessible to the community.
We can collectively work with the
Apple developer community and build
a real strong sense of community,
attract a larger suite of
developers to the platform,
and have a bunch of solutions
out there that address specific
market needs that we haven't
been able to touch in the past.
So at a very high level,
that's a little bit about AIS.
We'll be here later on to answer any
questions you might happen to have.
Ernie?
Ernie White Thank you very much, Scott.
One of the great things about having
Apple iServices on board is that
often there's this Beltway effect.
When you're in a small community
and you hear things a certain way,
it's easy to get locked
into a certain mindset.
The Apple iServices people are out
in the field facing all the same
challenges you do as developers,
trying to figure out
what's going on from Apple,
what the directions are,
what the support they
have available there.
And they're an incredibly valuable
resource for us to understand
what are the issues that you as
developers in the field face.
So we're looking forward to this
new focus to be able to partner more
closely with them to really appreciate
and understand developer concerns
and make sure we have the right
solutions in place for you to succeed
in meeting the needs of your customers.
So that's kind of the whole new world
that we're trying to open up with.
And then my job in product marketing
is trying to take that great
technology and bring it out to these
people in the field so they can
build really compelling solutions.
So there's a number of things
we're doing to make that happen.
This is the standard piece
that people who have gone to
marketing school learn about.
So this is the packaging, pricing,
promotion, etc.
Let me just kind of walk through
that real quickly for you.
Historically,
there were two different products
you would buy for WebObjects.
One was a developer product.
Oops, that seems to have...
"Developer product, a deployment product,
and we're basically taking those two
and putting them into a single box,
which is both developer and deployment.
Now previously the
developer tools cost $14.99,
deployments started at $7,500
and went up to $50,000.
We have taken the $50,000
product and the $14.99 product,
put them into a single product,
costing $699."
And this isn't like the $4.99 or the
$99 product that you sometimes get
from other developers when they do
a low-end version of their product,
which doesn't have database access
or doesn't allow you to load,
balance, or share.
This is the full $50,000 product
in this little pretty box.
We had to work pretty hard
to squeeze it in there,
but it did fit.
And this is affecting not
just future going products,
but today's products,
WebObjects 4.0.1 and WebObjects 4.5,
and it's effective immediately.
Go to the Apple store after this session.
It should be up there.
You can download and buy it today.
We're very excited to be able to
really make this available to a
whole bunch of different customers
who never would have seen it before.
We're also really expanding the
channel used to access this technology.
It's no longer just a niche
thing for an enterprise business.
If you want to build a
WebObjects application,
there's a couple of options.
One, it'll be available to all
Apple resellers who want to carry it.
They'll probably most likely
be high-end resellers,
your Fri's, your value-added resellers,
your specialty integrators,
Apple solution experts.
But anyone who works in there,
who wants to carry it, can carry it,
as well as having it available
worldwide on the Apple Store.
We're also working to make it very
easy to bundle with your applications.
If you have a high-end
web publishing solution,
you can either tell your people to
buy it through their normal channels,
or we'll make it available for you to
deploy along with your application.
So you can get a serial number and the
right to copy the software to install on
your CDs and make it available to your
customers without having to go through
the hassle of an additional channel,
an additional installation.
We're still finalizing the application.
We're not going to go
into the details of that,
but our goal is to make it really
easy and really transparent
to you and your customers.
So if you want to build a really
powerful application that just happens to
include a $50,000 web server underneath,
you can charge them $50,000 and
pocket the profit for yourself.
[Transcript missing]
For more information,
there's a huge wad of
information available to you.
There is the new WebObjects website,
which has been redesigned to
reflect the new announcements today.
We have a WebObjects lab
available downstairs,
available every day over the lunch hour.
Go down there,
play with WebObjects 4 or 5,
try and build a
direct-to-Java application.
Get some feel for what this is and try to
think about how this might benefit your
customers or your development technology.
You all have a WebObjects 4 or 5
evaluation CD with some wonderful
movies and demos included to help you
get a taste for what WebObjects can do,
as well as some of the training
and other resources available.
We're also announcing the
WebObjects Community BoF.
We have a huge,
vast wealth of partners who have been
working with the platform for years,
who know a lot.
Some of them offer consulting services.
Some of them offer training services.
Some of them have some very
cool specialty applications,
which might inspire you
in what you're doing.
They're all going to be there,
having their PowerBooks and iBooks.
Hopefully, they'll show you some of
the cool things going on.
We'll just get together and hang out
for an hour and a half Wednesday.
We arranged to get the Civic Auditorium,
because we didn't have enough room
for the rest of you anywhere else.
Across the street, that huge building,
maybe we'll pack that out as well,
as we're doing here.
Be sure to come by and bring a friend.
And if you have technical questions
during the course of this week,
there's a woefeedback@group.apple.com
address where you can ask
questions about WWDC sessions.
This is not a general
tech support question,
but if there's something that was
covered in a session that wasn't
clear or you don't know where to go
next to find out more information,
feel free to send email to that
technical woefeedback email address.
And the second line is supposed
to be WebObjects@group.apple.com,
which is the marketing
address for my team,
which is currently just me,
but I'm working on hiring some
more people to help me take up
the load because we've got some
really great things planned,
and this is just the tip of the iceberg.